Accountability feature (#81)
autonity/docs.autonity.org: content/docs/concepts/architecture/_index.md

	- **Autonity Oracle Contract** implementing protocol primitives for computing median price data from external price data and managing the set of currency pairs for which Autonity's [oracle network](/concepts/oracle-network/) provides price data.
	
	Protocol smart contracts are part of the client binary. _Liquid Newton_ smart contracts are deployed on validator registration.

- Consensus layer: blockchain consensus provided by the **Proof of Stake Tendermint BFT** protocol. Blocks are proposed by validators and selected by the committee for inclusion in the blockchain, with finality. The consensus mechanism enables dynamic consensus committee selection using a stake-weighting algorithm, maximising the amount of stake securing the system.
- Communication layer: peer-to-peer networking in the **communication layer** is extended with new block and consensus messaging propagation primitives, to enable the gossiping of information among validators and participant nodes.

> ## Application layer: protocol contracts

Reviewer: I don't think "Application layer" is appropriate description for protocol contracts as they sit somewhere in between. So I would keep it simple:

```suggestion
## Protocol contracts
```

The Autonity Protocol Contracts are deployed by the node when it is initialised and run for the first time.

> ### Protocol contract account addresses

Reviewer: I don't think "account" adds anything, it seems redundant:

```suggestion
### Protocol contract addresses
```

- Application layer: protocol smart contracts:
	- **Autonity Protocol Contract** implementing protocol primitives for governance, tokenomics, liquid staking, and staking rewards distribution.
	- **Liquid Newton** contracts for validator-specific liquid stake tokens.

> 	- **Accountability Contract** implementing protocol primitives for accountability and fault detection of failures to adhere to consensus rules by consensus committee members during Tendermint consensus rounds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	- **Accountability Contract** implementing protocol primitives for accountability and fault detection, enforcing adherence to the [Tendermint consensus](/concepts/consensus/pos/) rules by committee members.
```

	- **Autonity Oracle Contract** implementing protocol primitives for computing median price data and managing the set of currency pairs for which Autonity's oracle network provides price data.
	
	Protocol smart contracts are part of the client binary. _Liquid Newton_ smart contracts are deployed on validator registration.

- Consensus layer: blockchain consensus provided by the **Proof of Stake Tendermint BFT** protocol. Blocks are proposed by validators and selected by the committee for inclusion in the blockchain, with finality. The consensus mechanism enables dynamic consensus committee selection using a stake-weighting algorithm, maximising the amount of stake securing the system. Consensus is further extended to:

>   - provide accountability and fault detection for failure to adhere to consensus rules by committee members, implementing slashing penalties and a Penalty Absorbing Stake (PAS) model.

Reviewer 2: I feel like these two points about accountability and oracle do not belong under the Consensus layer paragraph. They are both decoupled from consensus. 

It is true that validators have to run both the FD and the oracle as part of their "validator duties", but they are not part of the consensus process.

Author: Clear, thanks! Removed and edited in commit f0abfb26c62401bfb3d3de49897a639a5944840c.

Author: Does the edit resolve the problem, please, @lorenzo-dev1 ?

For all parameter definitions and the subset of modifiable parameters see the [Protocol Parameter](/reference/protocol/) reference.

#### State finalisation
The Autonity Protocol Contract manages state finalisation, maintaining [system state](/glossary/#system-state). Contract logic triggers:

- block finalisation
- at epoch end:

>   - [selection of a new consensus committee](/concepts/architecture/#committee-selection) for the following epoch

Reviewer 2: The order of operation is different now https://github.com/autonity/autonity/blob/8183c96276bfc0764ad59b31cde423d6245329c0/autonity/solidity/contracts/Autonity.sol#L587

Author: Yes. I updated the `finalize()` function but not here.  Corrected in commit 09a45fd2396e397f487814709f6a541ddb4e4c03

  - applying [staking transitions](/concepts/staking/#staking-transitions) for stake bonding and unbonding
  - applying [slashing](/concepts/accountability/#slashing) penalties for proven faults by the [Autonity Accountability Contract](/concepts/architecture/#autonity-accountability-contract)
  - [distributing staking rewards](/concepts/architecture/#reward-distribution) to Autonity protocol treasury, committee member validators, and stake delegators
- computation of median price data at the end of an oracle voting round by the [Autonity Oracle Contract](/concepts/architecture/#autonity-oracle-contract).

> To learn more about the finalisation logic see the protocol only `finalise()` functions in the [Governance and Protocol Only Reference](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To learn more about the finalization logic see the protocol only `finalize()` functions in the [Governance and Protocol Only Reference](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/).
```

This one should mirror the US spelling used in code

For all parameter definitions and the subset of modifiable parameters see the [Protocol Parameter](/reference/protocol/) reference.

#### State finalization
The Autonity Protocol Contract manages state finalization, maintaining [system state](/glossary/#system-state). Contract logic triggers block finalization:

- invoking the [Accountability Contract](/concepts/architecture/#autonity-accountability-contract) to apply [slashing](/concepts/accountability/#slashing) penalties for proven faults by the [Autonity Accountability Contract](/concepts/architecture/#autonity-accountability-contract)
- at epoch end:
  - [distributing staking rewards](/concepts/architecture/#reward-distribution) to Autonity protocol treasury, committee member validators, and stake delegators
  - applying [staking transitions](/concepts/staking/#staking-transitions) for stake bonding and unbonding
  - applying pending [validator commission rate changes](/concepts/validator/#validator-commission-rate-change)
  - [selecting of a new consensus committee](/concepts/architecture/#committee-selection) for the following epoch

>   - invoking the [Oracle Contract](/concepts/architecture/#autonity-oracle-contract) to [select oracle voters for the following epoch](/concepts/architecture/#voter-selection).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - invoking the [Oracle Contract](/concepts/architecture/#autonity-oracle-contract) to [select oracle voters for the following epoch](/concepts/architecture/#voter-selection)
```

To learn more about the concept see [Staking rewards and distribution](/concepts/staking/#staking-rewards-and-distribution) and [Staking accounts](/concepts/staking/#staking-accounts).

### Autonity Accountability Contract
The contract implementing the accountability and fault detection (AFD) protocol extensions, including primitives for misbehaviour accusations, proving innocence against an accusation, proven faults, slashing, and jailing.

The contract stores static [slashing protocol configuration parameters](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration) used to compute slashing penalties. Contract functions are called by validators whilst participating in the AFD protocol to:

- Return a committee member's proven faults
- Determine if a new accusation can be made and is slashable

> - Submit accountability events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Return a committee member's proven faults
- Determine if a new accusation can be made
- Determine if a validator is slashable
- Submit accountability events.
```

#### Accountability event handling
The Autonity Accountability Contract implements logic for handling accountability events submitted by committee members on-chain:

- Accusations and proofs of innocence:
  - accusations of misbehaviour to a committee member failing to follow consensus rules correctly.
  - proofs of innocence submitted in defence against accusations. They must be presented within the constraints of a innocence window measured in blocks to be valid. An accusation successfully defended gets deleted.
  - promotion of accusations to faults where feasible after expiry of the innocence window.
- Faults - direct submission of unforgeable faults. They lead to slashing without possibility of being defended by proof of innocence.

#### Slashing penalty computation

The Autonity Accountability Contract manages the computation of slashing penalties for proven faults at epoch end. A slashing model is implemented where a committee member is only slashed for the highest severity fault committed in an epoch. The contract implements logic to:

> - Calculate slashing amount based on static (set in the contract, see [slashing protocol configuration parameters](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration)) and dynamic factors specific to the epoch circumstances. See [slashing amount calculation](/concepts/accountability/#autonity-slashing-amount-calculation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Calculate slashing amount based on static (set in the contract, see [slashing protocol configuration parameters](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration)) and dynamic factors specific to the epoch circumstances. See [slashing amount calculation](/concepts/accountability/#autonity-slashing-amount-calculation).
```
fix link

To learn more about the concept see [Staking rewards and distribution](/concepts/staking/#staking-rewards-and-distribution) and [Staking accounts](/concepts/staking/#staking-accounts).

### Autonity Accountability Contract
The contract implementing the accountability and fault detection (AFD) protocol extensions, including primitives for misbehaviour accusations, proving innocence against an accusation, proven faults, slashing, and jailing.

The contract stores static [slashing protocol configuration parameters](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration) used to compute slashing penalties. Contract functions are called by validators whilst participating in the AFD protocol to:

- Return a committee member's proven faults
- Determine if a new accusation can be made
- Determine if a validator is slashable
- Submit accountability events.

Function calls to compute accountability each block and apply slashing penalties at epoch end are restricted to protocol.

> 

Reviewer: I think this sentence can be removed as it doesn't add any useful information in this context.

```suggestion
```

All functions are documented in the Reference [Autonity Interfaces](/reference/api/): public API's under [Accountability Contract Interface](/reference/api/accountability/), governance under [Governance and Protocol Only Reference](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/).

#### Accountability event handling
The Autonity Accountability Contract implements logic for handling accountability events submitted by committee members on-chain:

- Accusations and proofs of innocence:
  - accusations of misbehaviour to a committee member failing to follow consensus rules correctly.
  - proofs of innocence submitted in defence against accusations. They must be presented within the constraints of a innocence window measured in blocks to be valid. An accusation successfully defended gets deleted.
  - promotion of accusations to faults where feasible after expiry of the innocence window.

> - Faults - direct submission of unforgeable faults. They lead to slashing without possibility of being defended by proof of innocence.

Reviewer: Another nested list that can be flattened:

```suggestion
- Accusations of misbehaviour for a committee member failing to follow consensus rules correctly.
- Proofs of innocence submitted in defence against accusations. They must be presented within the constraints of a innocence window measured in blocks to be valid. An accusation successfully defended gets deleted.
- Promotion of accusations to faults where feasible after expiry of the innocence window.
- Direct submission of unforgeable faults. They lead to slashing without possibility of being defended by proof of innocence.
```

To learn more about the concept see [Staking rewards and distribution](/concepts/staking/#staking-rewards-and-distribution) and [Staking accounts](/concepts/staking/#staking-accounts).

### Autonity Accountability Contract
The contract implementing the accountability and fault detection (AFD) protocol extensions, including primitives for misbehaviour accusations, proving innocence against an accusation, proven faults, slashing, and jailing.

The contract stores static [slashing protocol configuration parameters](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration) used to compute slashing penalties.

> Contract functions for returning a committee member's proven faults, if a new accusation can be made and is slashable, and to submit accountability events are called by validators whilst participating in the AFD protocol. Function calls to compute accountability each block and apply slashing penalties at epoch end are restricted to protocol.

Reviewer 2: I think the purpose of this paragraph would be to highlight which functions are called by the protocol and which by single validator. If yes, I would rephrase it as it is a bit hard to parse (at least for me). Maybe using a bulleted list would be more efficient.

Author: Yes. Edited and converted to a list. Commit f0abfb26c62401bfb3d3de49897a639a5944840c.

Author: Can this be resolved after the edit made @lorenzo-dev1 ?

All functions are documented in the Reference [Autonity Interfaces](/reference/api/): public API's under [Accountability Contract Interface](/reference/api/accountability/), governance under [Governance and Protocol Only Reference](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/).

#### Accountability event handling
The Autonity Accountability Contract implements logic for handling accountability events submitted by committee members on-chain:

- Accusations and proofs of innocence:

>   - accusations of misbehaviour by a committee member failing to follow consensus rules correctly whilst proposing new blocks or voting on proposed blocks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - accusations of misbehaviour to a committee member failing to follow consensus rules correctly.
```

>   - proofs of innocence submitted in defence against accusations within the constraints of a proof window measured in blocks, cancelling accusations successfully defended

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - proofs of innocence submitted in defence against accusations. They must be presented within the constraints of a innocence window measured in blocks to be valid. An accusation successfully defended gets deleted.
```

  - promotion of accusations to faults where feasible after expiry of the innocence window.

> - Faults - direct submission of unforgeable faults that can't be defended by proof of innocence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Faults - direct submission of unforgeable faults. They lead to slashing without possibility of being defended by proof of innocence.
```
